"I feel like there's almost no better case study of this idea that shops being close to each other isn't necessarily being bad for business than the shops on Delmar Loop- I mean with Blueprint and Meshuggah and Starbucks, and then all these bubble tea places that I couldn't even name them all- are there any specific challenges that you face as a shop that's so close to so many other shops?"

"I 100% agree with you. The reason I got into the coffee- why I bought Meshuggah- I bought it for the community. I kind of went into this without thinking about "the business", if that makes sense. I had a business before, so I do like to geek out on business and marketing and like all that stuff- like I could totally talk about stuff like that all day- but I really, I was a regular Meshuggah, and [the former owner] told me one day when I was on my way to work, it was easier to sell it. I was like, "Oh my god, who's gonna buy this?" So I really bought it with the intention of just keeping it alive."

"And then, maybe like three or four months into it, people were like, "You know Blueprint is opening and that's probably why [he] sold it to you." It didn't even occur to me that there was this third-wave, aspriational type of place... it was definitely the way coffee was moving. I think in the back of [the former owner]'s mind, he was really thinking about this competition, and the trolley construction, like, this could be the end. I wasn't really thinking like that.

[...]

"After a few months of running it, I analyzed what was on the street, and because I do love to geek out about stuff like that, I looked at Blueprint and what their expertise is- they're goig to be thei third-wave, sort of "hipster" place, where they do coffee profiling and cupping and all that. I just wanted to keep thinks at Meshuggah the exafct same. Like, I wanted the same cluture, the same homey feel, and I did analyze them and like- I can't really compete with them in that way, mnor do I want to, because I don't have that kind of coffee expertise, so I just kept the coffee the same and didn't think of [Blueprint] as competition in that regard."

"Starbucks I do think of as competition, because I don't think their coffee fits into that same category [as Blueprint]. At the time, Starbucks was just kind of sad and lonely, so I didn't worry about them as much. They've since gone through a renovation. And I do think there are Starbucks lovers who will still be Starbucks lovers. And like, [Meshuggah] is closedo n Mondays, so on Mondays, I'll go to Starbucks! People [from Meshuggah] will see me [at Starbucks] and be like, "Oh, sorry [for going to Starbucks]!", and I'm like, no, don't apologize!"

"Same, I shop at every cafe on The Loop."

"Yeah! And I like when I see other coffee shops doing well! I'll scroll down Instagram and if I see a picture, I'll be like "Great! Rise is doing a good job there!" So there's an underlying competition that people have... I just don't think of it like that. If everybody's enjoying themselves and the community is there, then that's the successful part. Though, I do really like to cook, so I analyzed what was missing on [Delmar Loop], and as far as competition goes, I realzied we didn't have a breakfast place. I analyzed [the menu that came with the shop when I purchased it]- it had like, anything you can make out of the ingredients on hand. Ten different flatbreads, falafel, all this stuff. I was like, wait. There were three pizza places at the time, there are four middle eastern places, we don't need [to copy] that. So I analyzed it and made it very breakfast heavy, and I think that was super helpful in setting us apart."

"So you've already kind of answered this a bit, but do you think it's that homey feel and tailored menu that sets you apart from Starbucks?

"For me, a coffee shop is about community, and people recognizing you and you recognizing the people you see there, and about feeling a sense of it being your space. I don't think people go to Starbucks for that reason- I think they go for caffeine. If [the community feeling] happens at a Starbucks, that's great. If there's somebody who works there for a long time and they learn your name, I think it's a secondary thing, whereas I think for us the community is first."

"So would you pretty firmly qualify Meshuggah as a third-place type of environment?"

"Yeah, absolutely. When I bought it, everyone was like, "Don't you think you should set a maximum time at the tables? Charge for internet?" and I'm like, no, that's exactly the opposite of what I wanted to do.

"It's been amazing to me, it just works out. The flow is right. Sometimes every now and then on a Saturday, people will take a table that could seat six people for like six hours and I'm like... "Oh, when are they going to leave?", but really, it's been fine. So yeah, I want people to feel [at home].

"So, I don't really remember because I didn't really get into mobile ordering until the pandemic, but did you have a mobile ordering system in place before that? Or is that new?"

"No, it's been insane. [In the past], I didn't even answer the phone- I don't know what our phone number is. I'm never answering the phone because I don't want to be a take-out place because it doesn't feel like community. [...] So I was actually on vacation, and [the Meshuggah] staff called me and said "Do you know that places are closing?" And I'm like, what are you talking about? It really felt like some apocolyptic movie night- we all experienced that. So I'm like, okay, take the inventory and go home, and we shut down from that day for like four months.

"I actually walked by on that day- I saw everyone sitting at the long table with all the inventory out on the table, and I was just like, 'Nooooooo!'"

"It was the most bizarre thing I've ever seen. Then Square caught me [...], they said, "We're offering free online menus and takeout, so they helped me- it was the only way to survive- so they helped me construct it. It was really intuitive. They helped me construct that whole menu that's online right now. So we quickly just switched gears into that, and that was the only way we could have stayed in business. So the challenge is going to be, onace we open up, that takes up so much space to prepare to-go orders- I'm not sure how to meld those two business models."

"How has mobile ordering affected the type or volume of customers you're getting?"

"It's definitely increased our business- probably ten times what it would be without the mobile app during all of this. And [Meshuggah] is a way people can socialize off campus with the big outdoor seating area, so I'm thinking that has a bit to do with it too. Also, I think people are trying to be supportive. So with all that in play, our business is booming right now.

"So if you were going ot open a brand-new coffee shop tomorrow, what are some of the things that you would take into consideration?"

"I'd think about the physical space, and foot traffic, and who my customers are, how many employees I'd need. I mean, there's really only a couple variables in running a coffee shop- your cost of wages, your rent, cost of goods, your product- so there isn't really that much to geek out on. Because I'm not in this for the money and it has been successful, I would just, again, look for the community. I would do the same thing I did before, just look for whether it's a community I wanted to be a part of, and whether the community could sustain the product."

[...]

"My one big obstacle is that mobile ordering has gotten in the way of the community feel, and it's super frustrating to me. If you ask me what my biggest problem is with mobile ordering- while it's saved me, it also but a huge problem in my path. An order comes in, you have ten online orders, and then one person comes in and it looks like nobody's sitting there, but there's really no way to organize that. I mean, maybe a bigger kitchen could have two cooks, but I don't [have a bigger kitchen], so for me it presents a huge obstacle for how to keep the community alive while having a big mobile app presence. You know, that demand to get things out the door. They want their food, you can't just ignore it, you know? The timing is super tricky."

[...]

"I don't know if you've been coming in over the weekends recently, but it's super crowded, so I try to set people's expectations. It's almost like you have to train the customers a little bit. It's almost like- if you've ever been to Half & Half [a local breakfast/brunch sit-down restaurant]- you'll have a line out the door and be waiting an hour to sit down. I try to expkain to people that you don't have to wait to order, but you do have to wait to get your food- it's just a different way. I'm trying to set that expectation."

"I do feel like- I try not to compete with [other cafes on the street], but I do feel a slight competition with staffing. I do feel a little bit jealous every now and then. I have a policy that I would never ever ever steal anybody or ask anyone to come from another place. [...] There's competition for good employees."

"So once things calm down and indoor service can resume, are you thinking you'll continue using the app? Are you looking to move away from that model since you've got the student population to rely on?"

"I would love to keep it in place, because I see how happy it makes everybody. The one need I couldn't meet was that whole Starbucks in-and-out kind of thing, so I think for people in the morning on their way to work, it's super important to have that mobile app, because they order their coffee and they can leave their house and grab it. I'd lose lots of customers for sure [if I dropped the app]. So I really like that I can provide that. But I don't know the answer, to be honest. I've played around with redesigning- like, shutting down and redesigning the cafe, because right now it's just so small, so I've considered designing a place where we can accomodate both orders and split them. [...] To keep the mobile app open, I will probably have to redesign the kitchen to accomodate it. I just think it would be impossible otherwise."