Ben Fierce, former manager of Kaldi's at City Park

"There were three [Starbucks locations] within walking distance that I'm aware of. I don't know that we felt Starbucks was really in the same business as us. Obviously we're selling coffee, they're selling coffee; we're selling food, they're selling food. But Kaldi's- they're very serious about coffee. A less kind word might be that they're "coffee snobs". I don't feel like that's the kind of company [Starbucks] is. They're not really even a coffee company, they're a drink company for sugar and coffee happens to be part of what they  sell. But their coffee offerings- yes, they're concerned with them being high quality, but more to the point, consistent across all of their locations. Like, when you go and order a latte at a Starbucks, it's going ot taste the same in each different location. At Kaldi's, we offer a bunch of different coffees, a bunch of different blends, a bunch of different sources of coffee, all of which have very distinct flavor profiles. People who wouldn't be regulars [at Starbucks] generally came back [to Kaldi's] because we did offer interesting and varied coffee experiences for them to try. We'd have three or four drip coffees up at any given time, all of which would taste very different. We rotated our espresso blend pretty frequently and that would  taste pretty different. And our actual drink offerings were more what you'd expect from a really traditional espresso bar, as opposed to at Starbucks where you're going there for a Starbucks drink- you're not going there for a traditional latte or traditional macchiato or anything like that. Like I said, I didn't really think about Starbucks on a day-to-day basis because I didn't really think we were competing with the same customers. We were competing with peopel who were really, really serious about coffee. We're more of a sit-down restaurant than Starbucks. People are coming into [Kaldi's] for lunch They're coming because they want an actual full meal that we'd be able to provide as opposed to something from the grab-n-go at Starbucks."

"Would you consider the particular store you managed to have a third-place sort of environment?"

"Yeah, and a different kind of third place. Because, like I said, it's a very pretty location. Particularly, in the summer, when we had outdoor seating available- people loved to be there and sit outside and be in the park and enjoy the weather and things like that. It was different. We didn't have couches or big, overstuffed chairs or anything like that; we had restaurant tables.

"When you worked there, did you use any sort of mobile app, online ordering, anything like that?"

"Actually, I'm the perfect person to ask for that, becauseI actually implemented it. When the pandemic hit, we actually switched over to a point-of-sale system called Toast, which has integrated online ordering and an online app. So, when my cafe was closed, before they laid me off when we were kind of looking for things to do, my full-time job ended up being implementing our menu in the Toast app and the Toast mobile platform."

"So maybe this affected other locations more than yours, but did you see an effect on the type of customers or the volume of customers- anything like that?"

"Volume, definitely. I don't know that the cafes that stayed open would have survived without online ordering. So that was huge, but I don't think the makeup of the customer base changed, but the volume of orders dod. Like, the DeMun location- I don't have super recent data, but I know in the first couple of months after they opened, they were actually doign better business on a daily basis than they had been prior to the pandimic.

"Oh wow!"

"Yeah, and I think online ordering was a huge part of that."

"You've kind of answered this a bit already, but what do you think Kaldi's offers that places like Starbucks, McDonald's, Bread Co., and Dunkin' don't? What would make a customer choose Kaldi's over them?"

"Have you ever walked into an independent coffee shop and you sort of felt like, 'Oh, I am not hip enough to be here!'"

"Yeah... [coffee shop name redacted]..."

"Great example. I feel like Kaldi's is trying to offer the kind of high-quality, "coffee-snob" quality coffee that you get at that type of place, but with a much, much more welcoming atmostphere. They want it to be a place where somebody who was only at Starbucks before could walk in, feel very comfortable, and then be like, 'Oh my god, I've never tasted coffee like this before!' And I think they do a reasonably good job of that in terms of their customer service, philosophy, and processes. I don't know what kind of marketing they do around that, or if they do any marketing around that. They're also a roaster/wholesaler, and that's a huge segment of their business, beside their retail stores."

[...]

"It's kind of weird- the winners and losers of the pandemic. Generally, coffee shops are doing okay. I was unfortunate enough that, for my location, if the office workers weren't there... that kind of killed it. But the other cafes have all been doing okay."

"I get the idea of 'Hey, if Starbucks says "I have something set up here!" then maybe this is a great location for coffee!' I would just say that you can't just pop up and try to be Not-Starbucks. Like, it has to be distinct and you have to be offering something that is different from what Starbucks is offering, otherwise, you know, you're not going to draw in the customers."

"So, if you were looking to start your own coffee shop tomorrow, what things would you want to have in order to try to make it successful?"

"Well, I think the thing people don't really understand about making a successful coffee shop is that there's actually a huge amount of capital investment that has to happen first. You know, if you're going to be going really high-quality coffee, if you're going to be having an espresso machine... there are actually really significant water and power requirements, and not every location is good. So, you're finding a good location market-wise, that's great, but you also need to find a space that is going to fulfill those pretty substantial infrastructure requirements. And if you don't have something like that? Be prepared to spend many tens of thousands of dollars in order to get your coffee place up and running. But beyond that, I really think your differentiation needs to be really dependent on what the market in the area that you're serving is. If the market's really high-traffic where people want their coffee and they want to go, then you need to be really streamlined and focused on the drinks and maybe not gumming up the works with a lot of options- keep your menu small. If instead it's supposed to be a place where people are intending to sit a while and eat, then you can have things be a bit more expansive and full-service, things like that. But really, the first thing is make sure you really understand what is required to run and industrial coffee machine, or you're going to be in real trouble."
 